README.md, before:

# Summer School: Computational Psycholinguistics - Practical Session

[![Binder](https://mybinder.org/badge_logo.svg)](https://mybinder.org/v2/gh/jobschepens/mlschool-text/HEAD?labpath=notebooks)
[![Open In Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg)](https://colab.research.google.com/github/jobschepens/mlschool-text/blob/main/)
[![Open in GitHub Codespaces](https://github.com/codespaces/badge.svg)](https://codespaces.new/jobschepens/mlschool-text)

## Quick Start Options

### Option 1: GitHub Codespaces (Recommended for Full Development) 🚀
Click the "Open in GitHub Codespaces" badge above for:
- **Full VS Code environment** in your browser
- **Pre-configured Python environment** with all dependencies
- **Integrated terminal** and Git support
- **Jupyter notebook support** built-in
- **Free tier available** (60 hours/month for personal accounts)

### Option 2: Google Colab (Recommended for Learning)
Click the "Open in Colab" badge above, then:
- Navigate to the `notebooks/` folder
- Open either:
  - `notebook1_llm_generation.ipynb` - Generate linguistic predictors with LLMs
  - `notebook2_corpus_analysis.ipynb` - Analyze predictors vs. human reading data

### Option 3: Binder
Click the "Binder" badge above for a ready-to-run environment (may take 2-3 minutes to load)

### Option 4: Local Installation
```bash
git clone https://github.com/jobschepens/mlschool-text.git
cd mlschool-text
pip install -r requirements.txt
jupyter lab notebooks/
```

## About This Project

This repository contains materials for a computational psycholinguistics summer school practical session, extending the research from Schepens et al. to English using LLM-generated linguistic predictors. It provides both interactive notebooks for learning and a scalable corpus generation pipeline for research.

### Key Files
- **Notebooks**: Interactive Jupyter notebooks in `notebooks/`
- **Generated Data**: Pre-computed corpus and predictors in `output/` 
- **Reference Data**: Psycholinguistic datasets in `data/`
- **Scripts**: Standalone generation scripts in `scripts/`

## Recommended Workflow

Follow this step-by-step progression through the notebooks and scripts:

### 1. **Start Here**: `notebook1_llm_generation.ipynb`
- Introduction to LLM-based corpus generation
- Learn the basic concepts and setup

### 2. **Generate Large Corpus**: Choose one script
- `script-1-gen.py` - Original approach with fixed genre prompts
- `script-1-gen-dynamic.py` - New approach with more prompt variety (recommended)
- Or create your own version using the provided templates
- **Important**: Use an updated config file (e.g., `config_2m_llama.json`)

### 3. **Quality Check** (Optional): `quick_check_corpus.ipynb`
- Verify your generated corpus quality
- Check word frequency distributions

### 4. **Export Data** (Optional): `export_with_metadata.py`
- Extract and format corpus data with metadata
- Prepare data for analysis

### 5. **Merge Data**: `notebook1b_merge.ipynb`
- Combine multiple corpus sources
- Create unified predictor datasets

### 6. **Frequency Analysis** (Optional): `notebook1c_frequency_analysis.ipynb`
- Deep dive into frequency calculations
- Compare different frequency measures

### 7. **Compare Transformations** (Optional): `notebook1d_comparetransformations.ipynb`
- Analyze different data transformation approaches
- Validate preprocessing steps

### 8. **Final Analysis**: `notebook2_corpus_analysis.ipynb`
- Validate predictors against human reading times
- Load multiple psycholinguistic databases (ELP, BLP, ECP)
- Compare LLM-derived vs. traditional frequency measures
- Statistical analysis using restricted cubic splines

## Data Availability

All generated corpora and derived predictors are included in this repository for immediate use:
- `output/generated_corpus_with_predictors.csv` - Main predictor file
- `output/large_corpus_*.txt` - Generated text corpora
- `data/` - Reference psycholinguistic datasets

This allows you to run the analysis notebooks immediately without needing to generate new corpora (which can take hours and requires API keys).

## Project Structure

The project is organized into the following directories:

```
.
├── data/                 # Reference psycholinguistic datasets
├── notebooks/            # Interactive Jupyter notebooks for the practical session
├── output/               # Pre-generated corpora and predictors (included for sharing)
├── scripts/              # Python scripts for corpus generation
├── .env                  # For storing API keys (create locally, not tracked by Git)
├── .gitignore            # Specifies files and directories to be ignored by Git
├── README.md             # This file
├── requirements.txt      # Python dependencies for local installation
├── requirements_colab.txt # Dependencies for Google Colab
└── environment.yml       # Conda environment for Binder
```

## Setup and Installation

1.  **Clone the repository:**
    ```bash
    git clone <your-repository-url>
    cd <your-repository-name>
    ```

2.  **Create and activate a virtual environment:**
    ```bash
    python -m venv venv
    source venv/bin/activate  # On Windows, use `venv\Scripts\activate`
    ```

3.  **Install the required dependencies:**
    ```bash
    pip install -r requirements.txt
    ```

4.  **Set up your API key:**
    *   Create a file named `.env` in the project root.
    *   Add your API key to the file, like this:
        ```
        OPENROUTER_API_KEY="your_api_key_here"
        ```

## How to Use

### Quick Start (Using Pre-generated Data)
If you want to jump straight to analysis without generating new corpora:
1. Open `notebook2_corpus_analysis.ipynb` 
2. Run all cells to see the complete analysis using our pre-generated data

### Full Workflow (Generate Your Own Data)
For the complete experience and to understand the full pipeline:

1. **Start with the basics**: Open `notebook1_llm_generation.ipynb` to understand LLM generation concepts

2. **Generate a large corpus**: 
   Run the generation scripts with configuration files that specify model, target size, and other parameters.
   
   **Basic syntax:**
   ```bash
   python scripts/<script-name> --config <config-file-path>
   ```
   
   **Examples:**
   ```bash
   # Recommended: Dynamic generation with infinite prompt variety
   python scripts/script-1-gen-dynamic.py --config scripts/config_2m_qwen_30b.json
   
   # Alternative: Original approach with fixed prompts
   python scripts/script-1-gen.py --config scripts/config_2m_llama.json
   
   # With full Python path (useful on Windows)
   & c:/Python313/python.exe c:/GitHub/mlschool-text/scripts/script-1-gen.py --config ./scripts/config_2m_qwen_30b.json
   ```
   
   **Available config files:**
   - `config_2m_qwen_30b.json` - 2M tokens using Qwen 30B model (free tier)
   - `config_2m_llama.json` - 2M tokens using Llama 3.3 8B model (free tier)
   - `config_2m_gpt_oss20b.json` - 2M tokens using GPT model
   - Create custom configs by copying and modifying existing ones

3. **Process and analyze**: Follow the notebook sequence (1b → 1c → 1d → 2) as outlined in the workflow above

## Running Generation Scripts

### Command Syntax
All generation scripts use configuration files to specify their behavior:
```bash
python scripts/<script-name> --config <config-file-path>
```

### Platform-Specific Examples

**Linux/macOS:**
```bash
cd mlschool-text
python scripts/script-1-gen-dynamic.py --config scripts/config_2m_qwen_30b.json
```

**Windows (PowerShell):**
```powershell
cd mlschool-text
python scripts/script-1-gen-dynamic.py --config scripts/config_2m_qwen_30b.json

# Or with full Python path:
& c:/Python313/python.exe scripts/script-1-gen.py --config ./scripts/config_2m_qwen_30b.json
```

**Windows (Command Prompt):**
```cmd
cd mlschool-text
python scripts\script-1-gen-dynamic.py --config scripts\config_2m_qwen_30b.json
```

### Script Options

**Recommended: `script-1-gen-dynamic.py`**
- Infinite prompt variety using combinatorial generation
- Eliminates genre bias from fixed prompt categories
- More diverse vocabulary coverage

**Alternative: `script-1-gen.py`**
- Original approach with predefined genre categories
- More predictable content distribution
- Faster execution due to simpler prompt selection

### Configuration Files
Available config files for different models and scales:
- `config_2m_llama.json` - 2M tokens using Llama model (recommended)
- `config_2m_gpt_oss20b.json` - Alternative using GPT model
- Create your own config file following the provided templates

### Resuming Interrupted Generation

The generation scripts are fully resumable! If a generation process is interrupted, simply run the same command again:

#### Check Available State Files
```bash
python -c "
import json, os
state_files = [f for f in os.listdir('output/') if f.startswith('generation_state_') and f.endswith('.json')]
print('Available state files for resuming:')
for state_file in state_files:
    try:
        with open(f'output/{state_file}', 'r') as f:
            state = json.load(f)
        words = state.get('total_words_generated', 0)
        requests = state.get('total_requests', 0)
        print(f'📁 {state_file}')
        print(f'   Progress: {words:,} words | {requests} requests')
    except: pass
"
```

#### Resume Generation
Use the **exact same command** that was used originally:
```bash
# The script will automatically detect and continue from the existing state file
python scripts/script-1-gen-dynamic.py --config scripts/config_2m_qwen_30b.json
python scripts/script-1-gen.py --config scripts/config_2m_llama.json
```

**How it works:**
- Scripts automatically detect existing state files matching the config
- Progress is loaded: words generated, requests made, estimated cost
- Generation continues by appending to the same corpus file
- State is saved periodically (every 10 texts by default) for fault tolerance

Commit message:

add section on AI-assisted development and review process

README.md, after:

# Summer School: Computational Psycholinguistics - Practical Session

[![Binder](https://mybinder.org/badge_logo.svg)](https://mybinder.org/v2/gh/jobschepens/mlschool-text/HEAD?labpath=notebooks)
[![Open In Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg)](https://colab.research.google.com/github/jobschepens/mlschool-text/blob/main/)
[![Open in GitHub Codespaces](https://github.com/codespaces/badge.svg)](https://codespaces.new/jobschepens/mlschool-text)

## Quick Start Options

### Option 1: GitHub Codespaces (Recommended for Full Development) 🚀
Click the "Open in GitHub Codespaces" badge above for:
- **Full VS Code environment** in your browser
- **Pre-configured Python environment** with all dependencies
- **Integrated terminal** and Git support
- **Jupyter notebook support** built-in
- **Free tier available** (60 hours/month for personal accounts)

### Option 2: Google Colab (Recommended for Learning)
Click the "Open in Colab" badge above, then:
- Navigate to the `notebooks/` folder
- Open either:
  - `notebook1_llm_generation.ipynb` - Generate linguistic predictors with LLMs
  - `notebook2_corpus_analysis.ipynb` - Analyze predictors vs. human reading data

### Option 3: Binder
Click the "Binder" badge above for a ready-to-run environment (may take 2-3 minutes to load)

### Option 4: Local Installation
```bash
git clone https://github.com/jobschepens/mlschool-text.git
cd mlschool-text
pip install -r requirements.txt
jupyter lab notebooks/
```

## About This Project

This repository contains materials for a computational psycholinguistics summer school practical session, extending the research from Schepens et al. to English using LLM-generated linguistic predictors. It provides both interactive notebooks for learning and a scalable corpus generation pipeline for research.

### Key Files
- **Notebooks**: Interactive Jupyter notebooks in `notebooks/`
- **Generated Data**: Pre-computed corpus and predictors in `output/` 
- **Reference Data**: Psycholinguistic datasets in `data/`
- **Scripts**: Standalone generation scripts in `scripts/`

## Recommended Workflow

Follow this step-by-step progression through the notebooks and scripts:

### 1. **Start Here**: `notebook1_llm_generation.ipynb`
- Introduction to LLM-based corpus generation
- Learn the basic concepts and setup

### 2. **Generate Large Corpus**: Choose one script
- `script-1-gen.py` - Original approach with fixed genre prompts
- `script-1-gen-dynamic.py` - New approach with more prompt variety (recommended)
- Or create your own version using the provided templates
- **Important**: Use an updated config file (e.g., `config_2m_llama.json`)

### 3. **Quality Check** (Optional): `quick_check_corpus.ipynb`
- Verify your generated corpus quality
- Check word frequency distributions

### 4. **Export Data** (Optional): `export_with_metadata.py`
- Extract and format corpus data with metadata
- Prepare data for analysis

### 5. **Merge Data**: `notebook1b_merge.ipynb`
- Combine multiple corpus sources
- Create unified predictor datasets

### 6. **Frequency Analysis** (Optional): `notebook1c_frequency_analysis.ipynb`
- Deep dive into frequency calculations
- Compare different frequency measures

### 7. **Compare Transformations** (Optional): `notebook1d_comparetransformations.ipynb`
- Analyze different data transformation approaches
- Validate preprocessing steps

### 8. **Final Analysis**: `notebook2_corpus_analysis.ipynb`
- Validate predictors against human reading times
- Load multiple psycholinguistic databases (ELP, BLP, ECP)
- Compare LLM-derived vs. traditional frequency measures
- Statistical analysis using restricted cubic splines

## Data Availability

All generated corpora and derived predictors are included in this repository for immediate use:
- `output/generated_corpus_with_predictors.csv` - Main predictor file
- `output/large_corpus_*.txt` - Generated text corpora
- `data/` - Reference psycholinguistic datasets

This allows you to run the analysis notebooks immediately without needing to generate new corpora (which can take hours and requires API keys).

## AI-Assisted Development

This repository was developed with assistance from AI agents, primarily using Claude, while still aiming to maintain a high quality standard. AI assistance was used for code generation and markdown writing. All content underwent review (by me) of quality and functionality, accuracy, and clarity. However, the result is still a work in progress that shows possibilities of AI asstance but also shows the need to document the development progress in more detail, implement a more rigorous review validation process, assess compliance with institutional policies, and add more detail on AI vs. human created material. 

## Project Structure

The project is organized into the following directories:

```
.
├── data/                 # Reference psycholinguistic datasets
├── notebooks/            # Interactive Jupyter notebooks for the practical session
├── output/               # Pre-generated corpora and predictors (included for sharing)
├── scripts/              # Python scripts for corpus generation
├── .env                  # For storing API keys (create locally, not tracked by Git)
├── .gitignore            # Specifies files and directories to be ignored by Git
├── README.md             # This file
├── requirements.txt      # Python dependencies for local installation
├── requirements_colab.txt # Dependencies for Google Colab
└── environment.yml       # Conda environment for Binder
```

## Setup and Installation

1.  **Clone the repository:**
    ```bash
    git clone <your-repository-url>
    cd <your-repository-name>
    ```

2.  **Create and activate a virtual environment:**
    ```bash
    python -m venv venv
    source venv/bin/activate  # On Windows, use `venv\Scripts\activate`
    ```

3.  **Install the required dependencies:**
    ```bash
    pip install -r requirements.txt
    ```

4.  **Set up your API key:**
    *   Create a file named `.env` in the project root.
    *   Add your API key to the file, like this:
        ```
        OPENROUTER_API_KEY="your_api_key_here"
        ```

## How to Use

### Quick Start (Using Pre-generated Data)
If you want to jump straight to analysis without generating new corpora:
1. Open `notebook2_corpus_analysis.ipynb` 
2. Run all cells to see the complete analysis using our pre-generated data

### Full Workflow (Generate Your Own Data)
For the complete experience and to understand the full pipeline:

1. **Start with the basics**: Open `notebook1_llm_generation.ipynb` to understand LLM generation concepts

2. **Generate a large corpus**: 
   Run the generation scripts with configuration files that specify model, target size, and other parameters.
   
   **Basic syntax:**
   ```bash
   python scripts/<script-name> --config <config-file-path>
   ```
   
   **Examples:**
   ```bash
   # Recommended: Dynamic generation with infinite prompt variety
   python scripts/script-1-gen-dynamic.py --config scripts/config_2m_qwen_30b.json
   
   # Alternative: Original approach with fixed prompts
   python scripts/script-1-gen.py --config scripts/config_2m_llama.json
   
   # With full Python path (useful on Windows)
   & c:/Python313/python.exe c:/GitHub/mlschool-text/scripts/script-1-gen.py --config ./scripts/config_2m_qwen_30b.json
   ```
   
   **Available config files:**
   - `config_2m_qwen_30b.json` - 2M tokens using Qwen 30B model (free tier)
   - `config_2m_llama.json` - 2M tokens using Llama 3.3 8B model (free tier)
   - `config_2m_gpt_oss20b.json` - 2M tokens using GPT model
   - Create custom configs by copying and modifying existing ones

3. **Process and analyze**: Follow the notebook sequence (1b → 1c → 1d → 2) as outlined in the workflow above

## Running Generation Scripts

### Command Syntax
All generation scripts use configuration files to specify their behavior:
```bash
python scripts/<script-name> --config <config-file-path>
```

### Platform-Specific Examples

**Linux/macOS:**
```bash
cd mlschool-text
python scripts/script-1-gen-dynamic.py --config scripts/config_2m_qwen_30b.json
```

**Windows (PowerShell):**
```powershell
cd mlschool-text
python scripts/script-1-gen-dynamic.py --config scripts/config_2m_qwen_30b.json

# Or with full Python path:
& c:/Python313/python.exe scripts/script-1-gen.py --config ./scripts/config_2m_qwen_30b.json
```

**Windows (Command Prompt):**
```cmd
cd mlschool-text
python scripts\script-1-gen-dynamic.py --config scripts\config_2m_qwen_30b.json
```

### Script Options

**Recommended: `script-1-gen-dynamic.py`**
- Infinite prompt variety using combinatorial generation
- Eliminates genre bias from fixed prompt categories
- More diverse vocabulary coverage

**Alternative: `script-1-gen.py`**
- Original approach with predefined genre categories
- More predictable content distribution
- Faster execution due to simpler prompt selection

### Configuration Files
Available config files for different models and scales:
- `config_2m_llama.json` - 2M tokens using Llama model (recommended)
- `config_2m_gpt_oss20b.json` - Alternative using GPT model
- Create your own config file following the provided templates

### Resuming Interrupted Generation

The generation scripts are fully resumable! If a generation process is interrupted, simply run the same command again:

#### Check Available State Files
```bash
python -c "
import json, os
state_files = [f for f in os.listdir('output/') if f.startswith('generation_state_') and f.endswith('.json')]
print('Available state files for resuming:')
for state_file in state_files:
    try:
        with open(f'output/{state_file}', 'r') as f:
            state = json.load(f)
        words = state.get('total_words_generated', 0)
        requests = state.get('total_requests', 0)
        print(f'📁 {state_file}')
        print(f'   Progress: {words:,} words | {requests} requests')
    except: pass
"
```

#### Resume Generation
Use the **exact same command** that was used originally:
```bash
# The script will automatically detect and continue from the existing state file
python scripts/script-1-gen-dynamic.py --config scripts/config_2m_qwen_30b.json
python scripts/script-1-gen.py --config scripts/config_2m_llama.json
```

**How it works:**
- Scripts automatically detect existing state files matching the config
- Progress is loaded: words generated, requests made, estimated cost
- Generation continues by appending to the same corpus file
- State is saved periodically (every 10 texts by default) for fault tolerance
